>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, JANUARY 31:
CANDIDATES MAKE A FINAL PUSH IN
IOWA ON THE EVE OF THE FIRST
VOTES OF THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL
RACE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
HOW OKLAHOMA HAS BECOME THE
NATION'S EARTHQUAKE CAPITAL.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES ARE
RALLYING SUPPORTERS TO TURN OUT
AT TOMORROW'S IOWA CAUCUSES, THE
FIRST VOTES THAT COUNT IN THE
2016 RACE.
THE FINAL "DES MOINES REGISTER"
POLL, RELEASED LAST NIGHT, SHOWS
THE FIRST CHOICE OF LIKELY
REPUBLICAN CAUCUS-GOERS IS:
DONALD TRUMP WITH 28%.
TED CRUZ HAS 23%.
MARCO RUBIO, 15%
BEN CARSON, 10%
RAND PAUL, 5%
AND CHRIS CHRISTIE, 3%.
JEB BUSH, JOHN KASICH, CARLY
FIORINA ARE AT 2%, ALONG WITH
THE PAST TWO CAUCUS WINNERS,
RICK SANTORUM AND MIKE HUCKABEE.
ON THE DEMOCRATS' SIDE, HILLARY
CLINTON IS THE FIRST CHOICE OF
45% OF LIKELY CAUCUS-GOERS, AND
BERNIE SANDERS IS FAVORED BY
42%.
MARTIN O'MALLEY IS AT 3%.
TODAY, THE CANDIDATES MADE THEIR
FINAL APPEALS TO IOWA VOTERS.
IN HIS FIRST TIME ON THE BALLOT,
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP IS AS
CONFIDENT AS HE IS BRASH.
>> WE HAVE TO GET OUT THERE AND
CAUCUS AND DO ALL OF THE THINGS
THAT WE HAVE TO DO OR WE'VE ALL
WASTED OUR TIME, FOLKS.
>> Stewart: TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ HOPES IOWA'S WHITE
EVANGELICALS HELP HIM CLOSE THE
GAP WITH TRUMP.
>> SIX WEEKS AGO, EVERYONE'S
SHOOTING AT TRUMP.
NOW ALL THE REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATES ARE SHOOTING AT ME.
>> Stewart: FLORIDA SENATOR
MARCO RUBIO SAYS HE IS MORE
ELECTABLE IN NOVEMBER THAN
EITHER TRUMP OR CRUZ.
>> I KNOW THAT I AM THE
CANDIDATE THAT CAN BEST, MOST
QUICKLY UNIFY THE PARTY, UNIFY
THE CONSERVATIVE MOVEMENT, AND
GROW IT.
>> Stewart: AMONG THE DEMOCRATS,
HILLARY CLINTON POSITIONS
HERSELF AS THE RIGHTFUL HEIR TO
PRESIDENT OBAMA, AS A FORMER
MEMBER OF HIS CABINET.
>> I DON'T THINK PRESIDENT OBAMA
GETS THE CREDIT HE DESERVES FOR
MAKING SURE WE DIDN'T FALL INTO
A GREAT DEPRESSION!
>> Stewart: CLINTON CAMPAIGNED
WITH MASS SHOOTING SURVIVOR,
FORMER CONGRESSWOMAN GABBY
GIFFORDS TO ARGUE HER RECORD ON
GUN SAFETY IS STRONGER THAN
BERNIE SANDERS'.
>> COME JANUARY, I WANT TO SAY
THESE TWO WORDS: MADAM
PRESIDENT.
>> Stewart: THE VERMONT SENATOR
IS COUNTING ON THE YOUTH VOTE TO
CLOSE HIS GAP WITH CLINTON.
>> HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO MAKE
THE PUNDITS LOOK DUMB ON
ELECTION NIGHT?
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Stewart: SANDERS IS ALSO
SELLING HIMSELF AS THE MOST
COMMITTED TO TACKLING INCOME
INEQUALITY.
>> Stewart: OUR OWN JUDY
WOODRUFF IS ON THE CAMPAIGN
TRAIL, AND ONCE AGAIN, SHE JOINS
US FROM DES MOINES.
SO JUDY, LIKELY REPUBLICAN
CAUCUS GOERS, 47% IDENTIFY
AS EVANGELICAL OR BORN AGAIN
CHRISTIANS.
THAT LED HUCKABEE AND SANTORUM
TO VICTORY BUT THEY ARE NOWHERE
NEAR FRONTRUNNERS IN 2016.
SO WHAT EFFECT WILL
RELIGIOUS CONSERVATIVES HAVE
ON TOMORROW'S RESULTS.
>> Woodruff: THE LAST GO
AROUND EVANGELICALS WERE 57%
OF THE REPUBLICAN CAUCUS
TURNOUT WHICH IS SIGNIFICANT.
THIS TIME, THEY'RE SHOWING
UNDER 50%.
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS
EVANGELICALS WILL HAVE A
HUGE IMPACT ON THE RESULT.
WILL THEY BE DETERMINATIVE
IN TERMS OF IS IT GOING TO
BE THE PERSON WHO HAS MOST
OF THE EVANGELICAL VOTE?
PROBABLY.
BUT THERE ARE REPUBLICANS IN
THE STATE WHO DON'T
SELF-IDENTITY THAT WAY AND
THEY WILL PLAY A ROLE.
AND DONALD TRUMP IS COMING IN
SECOND AMONG EVANGELICALS.
TED CRUZ IS GARNERING MOST
OF THE VOTE BUT DONALD TRUMP
IS HOLDING HIS OWN.
AND HE'S DOING FAR BETTER
THAN CRUZ AMONG THOSE WHO
ARE NOT EVANGELICALS.
>> Stewart: SPEAKING OF
MR. TRUMP AND SENATOR CRUZ,
THEY ARE CLEARLY THE
FRONTRUNNERS.
THE REST OF THE FIELD THERE IS
JUST A GROUP MIDDLING, LET'S
SAY, OUT OF THAT GROUP, OUT OF
THAT FIELD, WHO CAN AFFORD
NOT TO WIN BIG TOMORROW?
>> Woodruff: NOBODY WANTS
TO COME IN WITH 2% OF THE
VOTE, FRANKLY WHAT THAT
POLL THAT WE'VE BEEN
DISCUSSING IS SHOWING.
THAT SEVERAL OF THESE
CANDIDATES ARE ALL RUNNING
AT JUST 2, 3%.
IT'S NOT GOOD FOR THEM.
AND I KNOW THE ARGUMENT IS
MADE, WELL YOU CAN COME IN
FOURTH OR FIFTH IN IOWA AND
GO ON.
BUT HISTORY SHOWS IF YOU
DON'T COME IN SOMEWHERE IN
THE TOP THREE, YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE A TOUGH TIME.
THAT'S ONE REASON MARCO
RUBIO IS WORKING SO HARD NOT
ONLY TO PULL OUT HIS VOTE,
BUT TO BEGIN TO PERSUADE
PEOPLE SUPPORTING THE OTHER
SO-CALLED MAINSTREAM
CANDIDATES LIKE CRIST
CHRISTIE, LIKE JEB BUSH,
LIKE JOHN KASICH, THAT THOSE
FOLKS SHOULD NOT, QUOTE,
WASTE THEIR VOTE.
AND THEY SHOULD COME ON OVER
AND SUPPORT MARCO RUBIO.
BUT WE'LL SEE HOW THAT WORKS
OUT TOMORROW NIGHT.
>> Stewart: ON THE
DEMOCRATIC SIDE CLINTON AND
SANDERS ARE RUNNING NECK AND
NECK.
HOWEVER HILLARY CLINTON
PULLS AHEAD IN VOTERS 65 AND
OLDER.
GIVEN PAST CAUCUSES WHAT
DOES THAT CODE FOR TOMORROW?
>> WELL, OLDER VOTERS
TRADITIONALLY DO TURNOUT
MORE FAITHFULLY ON CAUCUS
NIGHT.
IT'S JUST PART OF THEIR DNA,
YOU MIGHT SAY.
THEY'VE BEEN GOING TO CAUCUS
FOR YEARS.
AND THEY WILL LIKELY DO THAT
ON MONDAY NIGHT, BARRING
SOMETHING UNFORESEEN.
SO THAT SHOULD HELP HILLARY
CLINTON.
WHAT BERNIE SANDERS IS
COUNTING ON THOUGH IS THAT
FIRST TIME CAUCUS GOERS,
YOUNGER CAUCUS GOERS ARE
GOING TO BE TURNING OUT IN
BIG ENTHUSIASTIC NUMBERS FOR
HIM.
SO FAR, HILLARY CLINTON'S
PEOPLE ARE PRETTY CONFIDENT
THEY'RE GOING TO BE OKAY.
BUT YOU CAN BET THAT THEY'RE
WATCHING THE SANDERS TURNOUT
A LOT.
>> Stewart: JUDY WOODRUFF,
THANKS AS ALWAYS.
>> Woodruff: GREAT TO TALK
TO YOU.
>> Stewart: ISIS IS CLAIMING
RESPONSIBILITY FOR BOMBINGS THAT
KILLED AT LEAST 45 PEOPLE NEAR
THE SYRIAN CAPITAL OF DAMASCUS.
THE BOMBS DETONATED TODAY IN A
SHIITE MUSLIM DISTRICT SOUTH OF
DAMASCUS KNOWN TO SUPPORT THE
GOVERNMENT OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
SYRIAN STATE-RUN MEDIA SAID THE
ATTACKERS FIRST SET OFF A CAR
BOMB IN A BUS STATION, AND THEN
TWO SUICIDE BOMBERS BLEW
THEMSELVES UP AS RESCUERS RUSHED
TO THE SCENE.
THE BOMBINGS OCCURRED AS UNITED
NATIONS-BROKERED TALKS CONTINUED
IN GENEVA TO END SYRIA'S FIVE
YEAR CIVIL WAR THAT HAS CLAIMED
250,000 LIVES AND DISPLACED 10
MILLION SYRIANS.
AUSTRIA PLANS TO DEPORT MIGRANTS
TO COUNTRIES IT DEEMS SAFE FOR
THEM TO RETURN TO, AND PAY THEM
TO LEAVE.
TODAY, THE AUSTRIAN GOVERNMENT
DECLARED MOROCCO, ALGERIA, AND
TUNISIA SAFE AND SAID IT WILL
PAY REJECTED ASYLUM APPLICANTS
UP TO 500 EUROS -- ABOUT $542 --
IF THEY AGREE TO GO HOME.
OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS,
AUSTRIA PLANS TO LIMIT THE
NUMBER OF ASYLUM SEEKERS IT WILL
ACCEPT TO 127,000, ABOUT 1.5% OF
ITS TOTAL POPULATION.
AT THE SAME TIME, AUSTRIA
EXPECTS TO DEPORT 50,000
MIGRANTS.
LAST YEAR, AUSTRIA RECEIVED
90,000 ASYLUM APPLICATIONS AND
DEPORTED 8,000 MIGRANTS.
>> Stewart: IN THE CONTINENTAL
UNITED STATES, OKLAHOMA NOW
EXPERIENCES THE MOST EARTHQUAKES
THAT CAN BE FELT, OUTPACING EVEN
CALIFORNIA.
AS THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, THERE'S A FIERCE DEBATE
IN OKLAHOMA ABOUT THE CAUSES OF
THE QUAKES, AND HOW TO PREVENT
THEM.
>> Reporter: WHEN JULIE ALLISON
MOVED TO OKLAHOMA IN 2002, SHE
KNEW TORNADOES, ICE STORMS, AND
DROUGHTS CAME WITH THE
TERRITORY.
BUT SHE DIDN'T EXPECT
EARTHQUAKES.
>> THE SENSATION OF AN
EARTHQUAKE IS SOMETHING YOU
DON'T FORGET.
IT'S A SENSATION OF JUST REALLY
HELPLESSNESS.
>> Reporter: LAST DECEMBER, A
MAGNITUDE 4.3 QUAKE RATTLED HER
HOME IN THE OKLAHOMA CITY SUBURB
OF EDMOND THAT WAS FOLLOWED BY A
FLURRY OF SMALLER TREMORS--
ENOUGH, SHE SAYS, TO CRACK HER
FOUNDATION AND SHAKE UP HER
LIVING ROOM.
>> THIS ENTIRE ROOM WAS IN
DISARRAY.
>> Reporter: GENERALLY SPEAKING,
3.0 EARTHQUAKES CAN BE FELT.
4.0 EARTHQUAKES CAN BE DAMAGING.
BEFORE 2009, THERE WERE ONLY A
HANDFUL OF EARTHQUAKES IN
OKLAHOMA OVER MAGNITUDE 3.0 EACH
YEAR.
IN 2015, THERE WERE MORE THAN
900.
>> IT WAS A LITTLE MYSTERIOUS AT
THE VERY BEGINNING.
>> Reporter: OKLAHOMA STATE
UNIVERSITY GEOLOGY PROFESSOR
TODD HALIHAN SAYS THE LIKELY
CULPRIT IS WATER THAT'S INJECTED
DEEP INTO THE EARTH AS A RESULT
OF OIL AND GAS DRILLING.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT MOST OIL
WELLS, THEY'RE A SALT WATER WELL
THAT HAS A LITTLE BIT OF OIL AND
GAS IN IT.
AND SO YOU HAVE TO DO SOMETHING
WITH THAT BY-PRODUCT WHICH IS
SOMETIMES THE MAIN PRODUCT,
WHICH IS SALT WATER.
>> Reporter: FOR DECADES, OIL
AND GAS COMPANIES IN OKLAHOMA
HAVE BEEN GETTING RID OF THAT
WATER BY INJECTING IT BACK
UNDERGROUND.
IN RECENT YEARS, OIL PRODUCTION
HAS BEEN ON THE RISE IN
OKLAHOMA, PARTLY DUE TO
TECHNOLOGIES LIKE FRACKING, A
METHOD OF BURSTING ROCK
FORMATIONS TO EXTRACT OIL AND
GAS.
AT SOME OIL AND GAS WELLS, FOR
EVERY BARREL OF OIL THAT'S
PRODUCED, 20 BARRELS OF SALTY
WASTEWATER BUBBLE UP AS WELL.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT IN RECENT
YEARS, OUR RATES AND VOLUMES
HAVE INCREASED BOTH THE TOTAL
AMOUNT AND THE INTENSITY AT
WHICH WE PUMP IT INTO THE SUB-
SURFACE.
AND WE'VE GOTTEN ABOVE LEVELS
THAT ARE CAUSING SEISMICITY.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, ENERGY
COMPANIES IN OKLAHOMA INJECTED
ONE-AND-HALF BILLION BARRELS OF
WASTEWATER BACK INTO THE EARTH.
HALIHAN SAYS ALL THAT THAT WATER
REDUCES FRICTION BETWEEN FAULTS,
OR CRACKS, DEEP UNDERGROUND,
RELEASING PENT UP ENERGY AND
CAUSING THE EARTH TO SHAKE.
THERE'S NO QUESTION THE ENERGY
INDUSTRY HAS ALWAYS PLAYED A
HUGE ROLE HERE IN OKLAHOMA.
IN FACT, UP UNTIL THE 1980S,
THERE WERE ACTIVE OIL WELLS HERE
ON THE STATE CAPITOL GROUNDS IN
OKLAHOMA CITY.
BUT CONSTANT QUAKES ARE POSING
TOUGH QUESTIONS FOR AN INDUSTRY
RESPONSIBLE FOR ONE IN FIVE JOBS
IN OKLAHOMA AND NEARLY A THIRD
OF THE STATE'S ECONOMY.
LAST YEAR, OKLAHOMA'S REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR, MARY FALLIN, SAID SHE
BELIEVES THERE'S A "DIRECT
CORRELATION" BETWEEN THE
INCREASE IN EARTHQUAKES AND
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL WELLS.
AND CRITICS OF THE INDUSTRY,
LIKE DEMOCRATIC STATE
REPRESENTATIVE CORY WILLIAMS,
SAY THERE SHOULD BE A MORATORIUM
ON WASTEWATER INJECTIONS IN
SEISMICALLY-ACTIVE AREAS.
>> ALL OF THE ACTUAL SCIENCE--
THE PEER-REVIEWED LITERATURE
THAT IT OUT THERE, THAT IS
GETTING PUBLISHED IN THE
SCIENTIFIC PRESS, ALL DRAWS THE
SAME CONCLUSIONS.
"YES, YOU ARE INDUCING
SEISMICITY.
YES, YOU ARE GROWING TO A BIGGER
AND BIGGER SEISMIC ACTIVITY.
AND YES, YOU NEED TO STOP."
>> Reporter: BUT CHAD
WARMINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE
OKLAHOMA OIL AND GAS
ASSOCIATION, HESITATES TO SAY
THE INJECTIONS ARE ACTUALLY
CAUSING QUAKES.
>> YEAH, I THINK IT'S ONE OF
THOSE ISSUES WHERE OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS, WE'VE BEEN REALLY
STRUGGLING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
THE CONNECTION IS.
AND THERE CERTAINLY APPEARS TO
BE A CORRELATION, IN TERMS OF
THE AMOUNT OF WASTEWATER THAT'S
BEEN INJECTED OVER THE LAST FOUR
YEARS AND THE INCREASE IN
SEISMICITY.
>> CORRELATION THOUGH IS NOT
CAUSE?
>> I THINK THAT'S CORRECT.
I THINK THAT THERE ARE A LOT OF
THINGS WE DON'T KNOW.
THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS THAT WE
CAN'T EXPLAIN.
SO WHAT THAT LEADS US TO BELIEVE
IS THERE'S JUST A LOT MORE
SCIENCE THAT WE NEED TO GET TO.
WE NEED TO GET TO THE BOTTOM OF
WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> Reporter: THE INDUSTRY STILL
DISPUTES THE LINK.
WHY DO YOU SUPPOSE THAT IS?
>> WELL I THINK THEY HAVE
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, OR REASONS,
WHY.
I MEAN, I THINK THE INCENTIVE
FOR THEM IS TO CONTINUE TO DRAG
THEIR FEET AS LONG AS THEY
POSSIBLY CAN, SO THEY CAN INJECT
AT THE SAME RATES AND
EXTRAPOLATE EVERY LAST POSSIBLE
RESOURCE THEY CAN OUT OF IT
BEFORE WE ACTUALLY IMPLEMENT
REAL CHANGE AND REAL REGULATION.
>> Reporter: AFTER AN EARTHQUAKE
STRIKES, THE STATE'S OIL AND GAS
REGULATOR-- THE OKLAHOMA
CORPORATION COMMISSION-- OFTEN
DIRECTS COMPANIES TO SLOW OR
STOP WASTEWATER INJECTIONS AT
PARTICULAR WELLS.
TIM BAKER HEADS THE COMMISSION'S
OIL AND GAS DIVISION.
CAN YOU SAY THAT BY JUST
CONTROLLING THAT ONE LEVER YOU
CAN HELP PREVENT EARTHQUAKES?
>> ALL WE CAN DO IS MANAGE--
HELP MANAGE THE RISK.
SEISMOLOGISTS TELL US WHAT THE
HIGHEST RISK SCENARIOS ARE AND
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE FOCUSING OUR
EFFORTS ON.
MANAGING THE RISK, LOWERING THAT
RISK, AND HOPEFULLY THAT WILL
HAVE SOME RESULT IN THE NUMBER
OF EARTHQUAKES DECLINING OVER
TIME.
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH OIL AND
GAS COMPANIES AREN'T REQUIRED TO
FOLLOW HIS OFFICE'S DIRECTIVES,
THEY USUALLY DO.
BUT LAST DECEMBER, ONE OF THE
STATE'S BIGGEST OIL COMPANIES,
SANDRIDGE ENERGY, REFUSED AN
ORDER TO CUT BACK WASTEWATER
INJECTIONS, SAYING MORE
SCIENTIFIC ANALYSIS NEEDED TO BE
DONE.
THE COMPANY RELENTED EARLIER
THIS MONTH, AGREEING TO CLOSE
SEVEN OF ITS WELLS-- BUT THE
INCIDENT RAISED CONCERNS ABOUT
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
COMMISSION'S ORDERS.
I MEAN, THERE IS AN OPENING HERE
FOR COMPANIES TO SAY, "ACTUALLY,
WE'RE NOT GOING TO LISTEN TO
YOUR VOLUNTARY DIRECTIVES."
HAS THE INDUSTRY BEEN
COOPERATIVE, AND DO YOU THINK
THEY'LL BE COOPERATIVE GOING
FORWARD?
>> EVERYONE I'VE SPOKEN TO, AND
WE'VE HAD COUNTLESS MEETINGS AT
THIS POINT, ALL WANT TO
COOPERATE.
AND IF SOMEONE REFUSES TO
COOPERATE, WE STILL HAVE
JURISDICTION TO FILE AN
APPLICATION AND EITHER AMEND OR
VACATE THEIR PERMIT.
>> Reporter: SO FAR BAKER HASN'T
HAD TO TAKE THAT STEP-- WHICH
WOULD INVOLVE A DRAWN-OUT
JUDICIAL PROCESS.
AS THE NUMBER OF EARTHQUAKES IN
OKLAHOMA HAS INCREASED, THE
STATE LEGISLATURE HAS CUT THE
BUDGET OF THE COMMISSION, THE
ONLY STATE AGENCY WITH POWER TO
REGULATE DRILLERS, BY 14% FROM
$12.4 MILLION IN 2009 TO 10.7
MILLION LAST YEAR.
>> WE DON'T HAVE THE RESOURCES
TO STAY UP WITH EVERY EARTHQUAKE
THAT HAPPENS IN THE STATE.
WE FOCUS ON-- THE 4.0's.
AT THAT POINT WE KNOW THAT'S A
TRIGGER IN WHICH WE CAN TAKE
RESPONSE.
BUT DO WE MAKE A SCIENTIFIC
ASSESSMENT OF EVERY EARTHQUAKE
THAT HAPPENS IN THE STATE?
NO, WE DON'T, 'CAUSE WE DON'T
HAVE THE RESOURCES TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THEY CALL CUSHING,
OKLAHOMA, THE PIPELINE
CROSSROADS OF THE WORLD.
AND LAST OCTOBER THERE WAS A
MAGNITUDE 4.5 EARTHQUAKE NEAR
HERE.
AND IT GOT FOLKS WORRIED THAT
NOT ONLY DO THESE EARTHQUAKES
POSE A RISK TO LIFE AND
PROPERTY, BUT ALSO TO THE
COUNTRY'S ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE.
OIL AND GAS COMPANIES RELY ON
GIANT STORAGE TANKS IN CUSHING
TO HOLD UP TO 85 MILLION BARRELS
OF OIL.
IF AN EARTHQUAKE WERE TO
COMPROMISE THOSE TANKS, IT COULD
DISRUPT OIL MARKETS WORLDWIDE.
OCTOBER'S QUAKE WAS THE FIFTH
NEAR CUSHING GREATER THAN
MAGNITUDE 4.0 IN JUST A YEAR.
LAST FALL, THE CORPORATION
COMMISSION ORDERED COMPANIES TO
SLOW OR STOP WASTEWATER
INJECTIONS NEARBY IN PART TO
PROTECT THOSE OIL TANKS.
DO YOU FEEL THAT THOSE
FACILITIES ARE ABLE TO WITHSTAND
THE INCREASED SEISMIC ACTIVITY
WE'RE SEEING IN OKLAHOMA?
>> I DO.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL TEAGUE IS
OKLAHOMA'S SECRETARY OF ENERGY
AND ENVIRONMENT.
HE SAYS THE INDUSTRY AND FEDERAL
INSPECTORS REGULARLY CHECK THOSE
TANKS.
>> I'M ALSO COMFORTABLE THAT IF
THERE WAS AN AREA THAT'S GOT TO
FOCUS ON IT FOR THE CORPORATION
COMMISSION THAT THEY'D BE VERY
QUICK TO REACT IF THERE ARE ANY
EARTHQUAKES, IT'S CUSHING.
>> Reporter: TEAGUE SAYS HE IS
CONFIDENT THE CORPORATION
COMMISSION'S VOLUNTARY
DIRECTIVES WILL KEEP EARTHQUAKES
IN CHECK IN CUSHING AND
ELSEWHERE IN THE STATE.
BUT IT DOES, AT THE END OF THE
DAY, SEEM VERY REACTIVE.
THEY WATCH A SEISMIC EVENT
HAPPEN.
AND THEN THEY FOLLOW UP WITH A
DIRECTIVE.
ISN'T THERE SOME WAY TO PREVENT
THESE EARTHQUAKES BEFORE THEY
HAPPEN?
>> IT'S VERY REACTIVE.
AND I DON'T KNOW HOW TO MAKE IT
PROACTIVE, BECAUSE WE DON'T KNOW
WHAT THAT TRIGGER IS.
>> Reporter: THE OFFICE OF THE
CORPORATION COMMISSION, TIM
BAKER, TELLS ME THEY DON'T HAVE
ALL THE RESOURCES THEY NEED.
THEY'VE SEEN THEIR BUDGET GET
CUT BACK.
YOUR HEAD SEISMOLOGIST AT THE
OKLAHOMA GEOLOGICAL SURVEY LEFT
LAST YEAR.
>> HE DID.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU EQUIPPING
YOUR CHIEF REGULATOR WITH ENOUGH
RESOURCES TO DO THEIR JOBS?
>> I DON'T THINK WE HAVE YET.
AND I THINK WE'VE BEEN SLOW TO
GET THERE.
I THINK VERY, VERY SOON YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE ADDITIONAL
RESOURCES GO TO BOTH AGENCIES.
>> Reporter: AS GLOBAL OIL
PRICES HAVE FALLEN FROM $100 A
BARREL TO AROUND $30, SO HAVE
TAX REVENUES IN OKLAHOMA.
THE STATE FACES A $900 MILLION
BUDGET SHORTFALL THIS YEAR.
STATE REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAMS
SAYS LEGISLATORS MUST PROVIDE
MORE FUNDING FOR REGULATORS AND
RESEARCHERS TO DO THEIR JOBS.
>> YOU'VE GOT TO OPEN UP YOUR
CHECKBOOK.
YOU'VE GOT TO GIVE THEM THE
STAFFING AND THE RESOURCES TO BE
ABLE TO ACTUALLY DO THE THING
THAT THEY NEED TO BE ABLE TO DO.
HECK, WE DON'T EVEN HAVE A
SEISMOLOGIST ON STAFF ANYMORE IN
THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA.
AND NOBODY SEEMS OVERWHELMINGLY
CONCERNED ABOUT THAT.
>> Reporter: OKLAHOMA OIL AND
GAS ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT CHAD
WARMINGTON SAYS HE AND HIS
MEMBERS ARE CONCERNED.
>> I LIVE IN EDMOND.
I, YOU KNOW, I FEEL THESE
QUAKES.
I LIVE HERE.
IT'S NOT LIKE I'M NOT A PART OF
THIS.
AND I WOULD LIKE IT TO SPEED UP
QUICKER.
BUT I DO BELIEVE IN THE PROCESS
THE COMMISSION HAS.
AND WE'RE GETTING ON TOP OF IT.
NOT AS QUICKLY AS WE'D LIKE IS
PROBABLY NOT A VERY GOOD
POLITICAL ANSWER.
BUT IT'S THE RIGHT SCIENCE-BASED
ANSWER.
>> Reporter: YOU KNOW A SKEPTIC
COULD BE SITTING HERE LISTENING
TO YOU SAY THIS AND, FAIR OR
UNFAIR, THINK, "THIS IS JUST THE
INDUSTRY COVERING ITS BUTTS."
>> SURE.
>> Reporter: THEY DON'T WANT TO
SAY THIS BECAUSE THEY DON'T WANT
TO OPEN THEMSELVES UP TO BEING
BLAMED FOR EARTHQUAKES.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THOSE PEOPLE?
>> AS LONG AS THE COMMISSION,
THE STATE IS WORKING TO USE
SCIENCE-BASED DETERMINATIONS OF
WHAT'S CAUSING THESE QUAKES,
WE'RE GONNA BE FINE WITH THE
OUTCOME.
WE'RE GONNA PARTICIPATE IN THE
INVESTIGATION.
AND WE'RE GONNA DO EVERYTHING WE
CAN TO HELP BRING AN END TO, OR
DEFINITELY SLOW DOWN THE AMOUNT
AND THE MAGNITUDE OF THE
EARTHQUAKES IN THE STATE.
>> Reporter: BUT GEOLOGIST TODD
HALIHAN SAYS BEFORE THAT CAN
HAPPEN, THE STATE HAS TO INVEST
MORE IN THE COMMISSION AND
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.
>> THEY BARELY HAVE ENOUGH MONEY
TO ANALYZE THE QUAKES THAT HAVE
HAPPENED OR TO ANALYZE WHICH
INJECTION WELLS ARE DOING WHAT.
THAT'S THE FUNDING LEVEL.
AND SO THE SENSE THAT THERE IS
ANALYSIS GOING ON, THAT'S NOT
HAPPENING.
>> Reporter: ON THURSDAY,
GOVERNOR FALLIN ANNOUNCED SHE
WOULD DIRECT $1.4 MILLION IN
STATE EMERGENCY FUNDS TO THE
CORPORATION COMMISSION AND THE
STATE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
>> Stewart: READ OUR REPORT ON
WHY THE NATURAL GAS INDUSTRY IS
FACING SCRUTINY OVER METHANE
LEAKS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour
>> Stewart: AFTER ITS FOUNDING
IN 1636, HARVARD BECAME A VAST
REPOSITORY FOR ORIGINAL
DOCUMENTS AND MATERIALS RELATED
TO AMERICAN HISTORY.
AS THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS, HARVARD IS NOW
DIGITIZING ITS COLONIAL
COLLECTION TO MAKE IT MORE
ACCESSIBLE.
>> Reporter: FOR HUNDREDS OF
YEARS, VIEWING ITEMS IN HARVARD
UNIVERSITY'S ARCHIVES REQUIRED
THAT YOU SHOW UP IN PERSON AT
ONE OF THE SCHOOL'S LIBRARIES.
HARVARD ARCHIVIST MEGAN SNIFFIN-
MARINOFF IS LEADING A PROJECT TO
CHANGE THAT.
THE COLONIAL NORTH AMERICAN
PROJECT WILL DIGITIZE ALMOST
HALF A MILLION ITEMS AND MAKE
THEM AVAILABLE ONLINE.
>> OUR SENSE WAS THAT WE HAD
SOMETHING UNIQUE HERE THAT MIGHT
NOT HAVE BEEN A PART OF THE
LARGER STORY OF COLONIAL NORTH
AMERICA BEFORE.
>> Reporter: THE PROJECT'S
FOCUS: MATERIALS FROM THE 1600S
AND 1700's.
THE COLLECTION HOLDS EVERYTHING
FROM DIARIES AND LETTERS TO
DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS.
>> THIS IS ONE OF THE EARLIEST
ITEMS THAT WE'VE DIGITIZED THUS
FAR.
IT'S CALLED COLLEGE BOOK ONE.
>> Reporter: IT'S A LEDGER FROM
THE 1600's THAT KEPT TRACK OF
LIFE AT HARVARD.
SMALL DETAILS, LIKE A LIST OF
UTENSILS IN THE SCHOOL'S
KITCHEN, AND EVIDENCE OF
CONTROVERSIAL TREATMENT OF
NATIVE AMERICANS.
>> AND WHAT WE NOTICE IN 1665 IS
THE NAME WRITTEN IN, "CALEB
CHEESHAHTEAUMUCK."
THE FIRST NATIVE AMERICAN TO
GRADUATE FROM HARVARD.
THIS WAS A BIG PART OF THE
CHARGE OF THE INSTITUTION,
MISSION OF THE INSTITUTION,
INITIALLY TO CONVERT THE NATIVE
AMERICANS OVER TO CHRISTIANITY.
>> Reporter: THE COLLECTION ALSO
CONTAINS A SMALL GLOBE FROM
AROUND 1755.
>> YOU GET A SENSE OF THE
OBVIOUSLY, THE WORLD AT THAT
TIME.
IF YOU LOOK, FOR EXAMPLE, AT
AUSTRALIA, YOU WILL SEE IT
LISTED AS NEW HOLLAND.
>> Reporter: SOME ITEMS BELONGED
TO IMPORTANT AMERICAN
REVOLUTIONARIES.
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
SIGNER JOHN HANCOCK WENT TO
HARVARD IN THE 1750's.
>> THE FIRST IS A LETTER THAT HE
WROTE TO HIS SISTER IN 1754.
>> Reporter: HANCOCK WAS
APPARENTLY ANNOYED HIS SISTER
HADN'T WRITTEN TO HIM.
>> "DEAR SISTER.
I BELIEVE TIME SLIPS AWAY VERY
EASY WITH YOU.
I WISH YOU WOULD SPEND ONE HOUR
IN WRITING TO ME.
P.S.: I GIVE YOU MUCH JOY, BUT
SHALL HAVE MORE REASON TO SO
AFTER RECEIVING A LETTER FROM
YOU."
>> Reporter: THERE ARE THE
DIARIES OF MATH AND SCIENCE
PROFESSOR JOHN WINTHROP, A
DESCENDANT OF THE JOHN WINTHROP
WHO WAS THE FIRST GOVERNOR OF
THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY.
HE TOOK DETAILED METEOROLOGICAL
NOTES ABOUT THINGS LIKE WIND AND
SNOWFALL.
>> THIS MATERIAL IS FASCINATING.
IT'S SOME OF THE EARLIEST
WEATHER INFORMATION THAT WE HAVE
IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: AS THE COLONIES
HEADED TOWARD REVOLUTION,
WINTHROP BEGAN TO WRITE ABOUT
MORE SERIOUS EVENTS.
IN 1770 BRITISH SOLDIERS FIRED
ON AN UNRULY CROWD OF COLONISTS,
AN EVENT LATER KNOWN AS THE
BOSTON MASSACRE.
>> "1770, 5th MARCH, EVE.
A MOST SHOCKING MASSACRE IN
BOSTON.
A PARTY OF SEVEN SOLDIERS, UNDER
THE COMMAND OF ONE CAPTAIN
PRESTON, BEING PELTED WITH
SNOWBALLS, FIRED UPON THE PEOPLE
IN KING STREET.
KILLED THREE ON THE SPOT.
WOUNDED SEVEN OTHERS, ONE OF
WHOM DIED NEXT DAY, ANOTHER ON
THE 15th OF MARCH."
>> Reporter: WINTHROP ALSO
RECORDED ONE OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY WAR'S FIRST
BATTLES, AT BUNKER HILL IN
BOSTON WHERE BRITISH SOLDIERS
DEFEATED COLONIAL FORCES.
>> AND YOU SEE ON HIS LISTING
JUNE 7 THE BATTLE OF BUNKER
HILL.
AND ON THE 21st OF JUNE AS WELL,
YOU SEE THE SELECTION OF
COUNSELORS AT CONCORD HAPPENING.
SO THERE IS THIS PROGRESSION OF
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
HAPPENING THAT IS ABSOLUTELY
FORMING THE BACKDROP OF THIS
DAILY DIARIES.
>> Reporter: AN EYEWITNESS TO AN
EXTRAORDINARY TIME.
HARVARD'S ALREADY COMPLETED
ABOUT A THIRD OF A PROJECT, AND
PLANS TO FINISH THE REST OVER
THE NEXT FEW YEARS.
>> Stewart: ISLAMIC MILITANTS
KILLED DOZENS OF CIVILIANS IN A
NIGERIAN VILLAGE LAST NIGHT.
THE ATTACK OCCURRED NEAR
NIGERIA'S NORTHEASTERN CITY OF
MAIDUGURI.
NIGERIAN OFFICIALS SAY THE GROUP
BOKO HARAM KILLED MORE THAN 80
PEOPLE WHEN ATTACKERS OPENED
FIRE ON VILLAGERS AND SET FIRE
TO HOMES, AND THREE FEMALE
SUICIDE BOMBERS BLEW THEMSELVES
UP AMONG THOSE TRYING TO ESCAPE.
THIS WAS THE THIRD BOKO HARAM
ATTACK IN NIGERIA IN THE PAST
WEEK.
BOKO HARAM, THE GROUP THAT
KIDNAPPED MORE THAN 200
SCHOOLGIRLS IN 2014, HAS BEEN
CARRYING OUT TERRORIST ATTACKS
FOR SIX YEARS IN AN EFFORT TO
ESTABLISH ITS VERSION OF A
STRICT ISLAMIST STATE.
ITS INSURGENCY HAS KILLED AN
ESTIMATED 20,000 PEOPLE.
22 ALLEGED MEMBERS OF MEXICO'S
BIGGEST DRUG CARTEL ARE IN
CUSTODY AND TWO ARE DEAD AFTER A
JOINT U.S. AND MEXICAN OPERATION
ALONG THE ARIZONA-MEXICO BORDER.
A SPOKESPERSON FOR U.S.
IMMIGRATIONS, CUSTOMS AND
ENFORCEMENT SAYS THE HIGH-LEVEL
MEMBERS OF THE SINALOA CARTEL
WERE ARRESTED FRIDAY.
THE AGENTS ALSO SEIZED HUNDREDS
OF POUNDS OF DRUGS AND ASSAULT-
STYLE WEAPONS.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THEY WILL
SEEK EXTRADITION OF THE ALLEGED
CARTEL MEMBERS, WHO ARE NOW IN
MEXICAN CUSTODY.
THE CARTEL HAS BEEN LED BY
JOAQUIN "EL CHAPO" GUZMAN, WHO
WAS RECAPTURED EARLIER THIS
MONTH.
TANZANIA HAS ARRESTED THREE
ELEPHANT POACHERS WHO ALLEGEDLY
SHOT DOWN A HELICOPTER THAT WAS
TRACKING THEIR ILLEGAL HUNTING
ACTIVITY.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED FRIDAY IN
A WILDLIFE RESERVE NEAR
SERENGETI NATIONAL PARK.
TANZANIAN OFFICIALS SAY THE
POACHERS FIRED AN AK-47 AT THE
HELICOPTER, WHICH CRASHED,
KILLING THE PILOT.
TANZANIA'S MINISTER FOR TOURISM
SAID PARK RANGERS DISCOVERED THE
REMAINS OF THREE DEAD ELEPHANTS
NEARBY.
POACHERS WHO KILL ELEPHANTS FOR
THEIR IVORY TUSKS ARE BLAMED FOR
REDUCING TANZANIA'S ELEPHANT
POPULATION BY 60% SINCE 2009.
THE DEMAND FOR IVORY IS
STRONGEST IN ASIAN COUNTRIES,
WHERE IT IS USED FOR JEWELS AND
ORNAMENTS.
AND FINALLY, IN MYANMAR, NOBEL
PEACE PRIZE WINNER AND AUNG
SAN SUU KI WHO SPENT THE
BETTER PART OF TWO DECADES
UNDER HOUSE ARREST TAKES OVER
THE NEW PARLIAMENT ELECTED IN
NOVEMBER.
ON WEDNESDAY IN MARYLAND
PRESIDENT OBAMA MAKES HIS
FIRST VISIT AS PRESIDENT TO
AN AMERICAN MOSQUE.
AND MAKE SURE TO JOIN US ON
THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW FOR
MORE COVERAGE OF THE IOWA
CAUCUSES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.